Add missing documentation for benchmarking synthetic data generation tutorial (#1752)
inductiva/inductiva: tutorials/generating-synthetic-data/synthetic-data-generation-6.md

    Programming, HPC, Simulation, Tutorial, Synthetic Data Generation, Physics-ML, SPH"
---

# Benchmark Computational Resources

In the previous step of this tutorial, we used Inductiva’s templating mechanism to 
transform the configuration files for our base case simulation into a generalized 
file, allowing programmatic changes to key parameters. These parameters included 
dimensions, initial position and velocity of the fluid block, as well as the density 
and viscosity of the fluid itself, essential elements that define the core physical 
properties of the simulation. 

Additionally, we generalized certain hyperparameters, such as the ***particle radius***, 
which influence the simulation’s fidelity and performance.

So, besides the need to assess the impact of the hyperparameters in the 
computational cost of the simulation, we will also need to see if we can 
optimize the machine type. When selecting the right machine types for 
computational tasks, balancing speed and cost is crucial. In this step, 
we explore the performance and cost-efficiency of various machine types, 
focusing on how computation time scales with the number of virtual CPUs (vCPUs).

> ## 1. Download the input files to your local directory (```download.py```)

Reviewer: @HenriquePreto i think here it is important to just write a bit about this step, why you did it, walk the reader through the process just so they know why they need to do this step. provide context whenever necessary and always remember to link it to the step before it

Author: Probably we should refer to this step as 'Step 0' or omit it as a "step" entirely, since it may not be necessary for running the benchmark. For example, if the user already has a folder on their local machine, they wouldn't need to download it. But I needed to download the simulation files in order to run the benchmark example.

Reviewer: for example: first, we need to define and execute the benchmark in order to test the performance of the SPlisHSPlasH simulator across different machine types. to do this, we should define the input files and specify the default simulation parameters...

next, we need to define a list of machine types (with varying numbers of virtual CPUs and configurations) to be benchmarked. This includes two generations of machines (c2 and c3) with different resource capabilities...

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "This tutorial provides a step-by-step guide for benchmarking the synthetic data 
    generation simulation using the Inductiva API. Learn how to configure and run benchmarks on various 
    machine types from Google Cloud, analyze results, and visualize performance metrics for different 
    computational setups."
    keywords: "Inductiva API, Benchmarking, Performance, Metrics, Computation Time, Computation Cost,
    Programming, HPC, Simulation, Tutorial, Synthetic Data Generation, Physics-ML, SPH"
---

> # Benchmarking Computational Resources

Reviewer: @sarmento you'd have to start from this .md file, the other one was added as a draft for reference and this one is the one @HenriquePreto and I are working on.

Reviewer 2: OK! Will do that. But can you please apply my comments to the right place.
Thank you!

Reviewer 2: If applicable, of course...

from having to re-upload the input files every time you execute a run during the benchmark, which can save time (e.g., 
reduces setup time) when you're executing multiple runs (i.e., simulations). In other words, uploading the files ensures that 
they can be accessed across different benchmark runs and it also helps manage resources more efficiently.

```python
import inductiva

inductiva.storage.upload(local_path="splishsplash-base-dir",
                         remote_dir="splishsplash-input-dir")
```

Now comes the core of the benchmarking process: configuring the benchmark with the desired settings and running it across 
multiple machine types. In this step, you will define the benchmark parameters, such as the simulator used, the simulation 
configuration file, and the remote assets (i.e., the input files you just uploaded). The benchmark is configured to run 
across a range of machine families, from the less powerful ```c2-standard``` machine types to the more powerful ```c3``` 
machine types, each with varying numbers of vCPUs. Each run is repeated twice to ensure reliable and consistent results.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to explain that splishsplash automatically takes advantage of an increased number of vCPUs, that is, we don't have to explicitly set any level of paralelization ourselves?

Author: Yes that's an important detail -- the configuration is much easier this way. I'm going to add that.

Author: "An important point to note is that the **SPlisHSPlasH** simulator automatically handles parallelization, taking full advantage of the increased number of vCPUs on a machine without requiring additional configuration. This is not true for all simulators, such as **Reef3D**, which requires updating certain parameters in the configuration file."

In addition to the table, you may also want to visualize the data in the form of a plot. This graph makes it easier to 
analyze the performance across different machine groups, such as which machine type delivers the best cost-to-performance 
ratio or which configuration takes the longest time to execute. You can use [this](https://www.csvplot.com/) online tool to 
plot the benchmark results from the CSV file on a graph.

<img width="1466" alt="plot-splishsplash-benchmark" src="../_static/benchmark-machine-groups-performance-plot.png">

Finally, by observing the graph, we can easily identify which machine types provide the best balance between computation time 
and cost for this specific simulation use case. Here are the key takeaways:

- The best machine types in terms of computation cost and computation time are ```c3-standard-44``` and ```c3-standard-22```, 
with the latter being slightly slower but more cost-effective -- positioned in the leftmost bottom corner of the plot. They 
take 35 and 40 seconds, respectively, and cost $0.01 and $0.005 each.

- The speedup in terms of execution time levels off at 44 vCPUs. The ```c3-standard-88``` takes the same computation time as 

> the ```c3-standard-44``` (around 36 seconds) but costs twice as much ($0.02 compared to $0.01, respectively). An even clearer 

Reviewer 2: as much too execute the simulation.

indication of this plateau in speedup is that the most powerful machine, the ```c3-standard-176```, is actually slower than 
an older-generation machine with far fewer vCPUs, the ```c2-standard-30``` (around 49 seconds vs. 45 seconds, respectively). 

> Moreover, it costs 10 times more ($0.06 vs. $0.006).

Reviewer 2: This is the most important sentence of the blog post. It costs 10x more. Can we empashize tis, and maybe reinforce the fact that this is what benchmarking is about! By choosing the right machine, you can save 10x or more!

Author: Yes, I totally agree!

"This significant cost disparity highlights the critical role of benchmarking: choosing the right machine can **save you 10x in cost** for the same execution of the simulation, **without sacrificing performance**."

Reviewer 2: This is very cool, and we need to highlight this.

| c3-standard-44  | 0.011645839877                   | 36.152               | t8ajechar6rhstg1j71wpa0j9 |
| c3-standard-44  | 0.010654704568                   | 36.155               | irxjh6wxcus044e15uhhy1ww7 |
| c2-standard-8   | 0.002924085185                   | 71.496               | 8kb27eno9qajnpyx5pnubqzat |
| c2-standard-4   | 0.002211801235                   | 100.209              | ts13hykwxhgoamgczndsiyy96 |
| c2-standard-30  | 0.006574435185                   | 45.174               | 2sceirkj0dm1ye2v923ri5ziq |
| c2-standard-8   | 0.002961573457                   | 73.101               | 89aomezvc6mznu2q89u84vjan |
| c2-standard-30  | 0.006574435185                   | 45.172               | 4xau4bu9ikogmycqtwmv2ybdo |
| c2-standard-4   | 0.002211801235                   | 99.237               | 6a12iau416t567v15swn7ir78 |
| c2-standard-16  | 0.004102497531                   | 52.169               | tv7cy85r83u0sofgir5m8t8i3 |
| c2-standard-16  | 0.004314695679                   | 55.172               | c6f0bbbcdpcb88eorsyvwvms2 |
```

## The Results Are In: Our Simulation's "Sweet Spot" for Speed and Cost

> In addition to the table, you may also want to visualize the data in the form of a plot. This graph makes it easier to 

Reviewer: lets substitute our conclusion with this: 
```suggestion
Finally, our results are in! We used [CSV pilot]((https://www.csvplot.com/), an online tool, to plot the benchmark results on a graph and have a better visual of the data. 
```

analyze the performance across different machine groups, such as which machine type delivers the best cost-to-performance 
ratio or which configuration takes the longest time to execute. You can use [this](https://www.csvplot.com/) online tool to 
plot the benchmark results from the CSV file on a graph.

<img width="1466" alt="plot-splishsplash-benchmark" src="../_static/benchmark-machine-groups-performance-plot.png">

> Finally, by observing the graph, we can easily identify which machine types provide the best balance between computation time 

Reviewer: better:

```suggestion
When observing the graph, we easily identified which machine types provide the best balance between computation time and cost for our simulation. 

**Here are the key takeaways:**
```
